so we are you know a primate and we have
our brains in our in our head and we
have these two eyes and we our our
version of experience is really defined
by by the bodies we inhabit and the
planet we live on so you could imagine a
fungus that lives on a planet and it
totally inhabits it and it's basically a
giant neuron Network that's on that
planet but then that's not perhaps so
satisfying because if there is a planet
covered in fungus we're not going to
have a communication with that thing
[Music]
hello everybody I'm talking today with
Dr David Kipping a scientist an
associate professor of astronomy and
director of the cool worlds Lab at
Columbia recently tenured he's published
already over a 100 peer-reviewed
articles research articles and is an
active
Communicator regarding scientific
matters on
YouTube cool worlds YouTube channel what
did we talk about we talked about well
the position of man and woman in the
universe are we
alone we talked about the means by which
the
exoplanets that could Harbor alien life
have been discovered and assessed and
what those planets look like we talked
about the potential progression of
civilizations at different technological
levels and how that might be detected in
the cosmological space we talked about
Dyson spheres and the utilization of the
energy that a planet a sun produces for
moving the technological Enterprise
forward we talked about the big bang and
some of the challenges that have been
posed to the axioms and theories of
modern cosmology in the light of the
development of the James wat telescope
and we talked about the pursuit of
astrophysics as a career and so join us
all right well let's start with the big
question I suppose um I know that you
study the possibility of life elsewhere
in the universe and so I suppose the big
question that goes along with that
is are we alone in the
universe that's a question that so many
scientists have very assertive answers
to they feel very confident they know
what the answer to and typically the
response is well of course must be
there's sort of two ways of answering
that whether you're talking about simple
life microbial life or whether you're
going all the way to intelligent
civilizations compr to our own or even
far more sophisticated but on both
fronts the most intellectually honest
answer that I can offer you is I don't
know and I think we have to be
comfortable owning that that that
possibility at the moment that if you're
going to say I don't know you have to
concede that it may be possible that we
are alone but it's also quite possible
that we're not our job as scientist is
not to pregu what the answer is but
rather to do the experiment collect the
data and then to analyze it and
determine the most likely outcome but uh
I do have a lot of trepidation about how
overly zealous and confident some of my
colleagues are on this topic because I'm
just so aware of the danger of
experimenters bias which of course in
psychologies is a very common issue as
well with many experiments that have
been done where you pre where you think
you know what the answer to an
experiment is you can consciously or
subconsciously influence the outcome of
how you conduct that experiment how you
interpret it so I just say let's try to
be forcibly agnostic I hope the answer
is yes I hope there's someone out there
but I think it does us a disservice to
our objectivity when we say of course
there must be well it it seems to me
that part of the problem is is that all
the answers to the question seem
Preposterous right yes there's life
elsewhere okay well then the first
question perhaps that comes up there is
where um and then what and if there
isn't well that's seems completely
Preposterous because that's so it seems
so utterly unlikely given the vast
magnitude of the of the universe that we
would somehow be alone and the meaning
of that seems so incomprehensible that I
can understand why scientists
particularly would be loathed to accept
that it it implies a very peculiar kind
of uniqueness to Earth and then I
suppose the the third problem is well
are there other civilizations well the
only species that's ever managed a
civilization even on Earth is human
beings and that's only really occurred
in the last few hundred thousand years
so even in a place where we know there's
life the probability of an advanced
technological civilization that can
sustain itself
seems well it's happened once once isn't
very many times I know that human
civilization has emerged in different
places but really only after the last
ice age and only in a few places that
communicated very rapidly so further
thoughts on any of that yeah I mean you
kind REM me Arthur C Clark's famous
quote about this that there's two
possibilities and both of them are
equally terrifying that either we are
alone or surrounded and I think you're
you're right on the money in terms of
the the cognitive dissonance that both
of those seem to imply I think there are
ways out if the universe is teaming with
microbial simple life then I think we
could probably be okay with that
scenario in terms of you know
compatibility with the observations we
look out at these exoplanets and as
impressive as our instrumentation is
with especially the James web Space
Telescope even that facility is not
capable of detecting bio signatures life
on another planet unless we're extremely
fortuitous with the types of signatures
that they present so it's very unlikely
that even jdst would be able to detect
bio signatures we're probably looking at
the next generation of teles scripts to
make that experiment so therefore the
fact that nobody has made a headline yet
saying microbes discovered on proximus
centor b or choose your favorite
exoplant is not surprising um so we can
perhaps be comfortable with the idea
that the universe is compatible with
being full of uh simple life but then
that raises the question that means
therefore the simple life does not go on
very often to at least form Galactic
Empires right something like you seen
like Star Wars or Star Trek where you
have these federations spaning the
Galaxy right well I read a mathematical
analysis years ago in Scientific
American about from a scientist who had
been arguing strenuously against the
existence of advanced civilizations
because he calculated that even uh space
fairing
civilization that had reasonably but not
absurdly fast Interstellar craft could
populate an entire galaxy over the span
of something approximating a million or
a couple of million years and given that
the universe is 14 billion years old
perhaps that's
14,000 such time spans and yet well
where the hell are the aliens and so you
know that's that that was an interesting
argument as far as I was concerned I'd
never seen it sort formulated like that
from a kind of Quasi arithmetic
perspective that so that's known as
Hearts fact a so there's this idea the
firmy Paradox that I'm sure you've heard
of many of your viewers have probably
heard of this idea of you know if
everybody's out there why don't we we
see them we should see evidence for them
but kind of the stronger version of
thermy paradox is not so much about
radio signals or ships flying through
space but it really is the aspect of
colonization that if there really is um
a Galactic Empire that has some will to
span themselves across multiple planets
which remember is essentially what we're
trying to do I mean Elon Musk often
talks about this he says that he feels
almost an obligation to try and continue
the flame of Consciousness as he
describes it and that's why he wants to
go multiplanetary to to go to and to
build a colony there It's Perfectly
Natural that any species that that's
interested in
self-perpetuation would see the obvious
benefits of trying to expand to other
colonies to other plets and eventually
even to other stars because let's face
it even if you're all in the solar
system it can only take a nearby supern
noi or Gamay burst to completely
extinguish your life in this solar
system so there's an obvious need that I
think it's hard to argue why at least at
a common rate you'd expect a survival
Instinct
to encourage civilizations to want to do
this and yet there is the problem
because as far as we can tell that has
not happened we do not see stars which
have been engineered we do not see
Galactic spanning Empires or Dyson
spheres littering the sky so it appears
as far as we can tell that if there are
others out there they're certainly not
at a rate where they dominate the Galaxy
if they are that they're very rare and
maybe they're around one or two of
handful of stars a sprinkling of stars
if you like but but they certainly don't
Dominate and that that's perplexing
because you would think a survival
Instinct would be to go out and get as
many as you
could well it's also perplexing in that
if such civilizations are possible then
and they've done it at all then why
aren't they everywhere I mean is it just
the fact that by some strange fluke of
time and space that we're either the
first ones to even vaguely attempt this
or or that
it's somehow set up so that what this is
equally improbable that that no Advanced
civilization that exists has managed to
get to that point it just doesn't seem
that especially given that we seem in
some ways as you pointed out to be on
the verge of that yeah so yeah it's very
I think Mysteries everywhere one of the
strangest things I think one of the
things we we have a lot of resistance to
is the idea of of any kind of suggestion
that we might be special I think
astronomers and cosmologists have a real
aversion to that idea
and it's kind of built into this idea
called the cosmological principle so
when we look out around the universe
this patch of the universe is not any
different from any other patch of the
universe that's kind of foundational to
how we understand the nature around us
and so it is a problem then it would
seem in congruous to this principle if
we admit that perhaps we are the first
or we are the only one or maybe the
Earth is the only planet in the whole
galaxy which is capable maybe not of
microbial life but getting all the way
to this point and and yet at the same
time this is called the cernan principle
sometimes as well the mediocrity
principle but what flies in the face of
that argument and I I hear that argument
all the time by many uh optimists let's
say for life in the universe what flies
in the face of that is what's known as
the weak anthropic principle and this is
an idea that Brandon Carter wrote about
in the 1970s and he was thinking about
cosmology as well and it's things like
the fine-tuning of constants of the
universe the speed of light the mass of
the electron these all seem to also be
kind of finely tuned such that life is
possible in this universe and if you
change any of those numbers then we
really shouldn't be here to talk about
it but of course an obvious answer to
that is that maybe there are many many
universes out there and it just so
happens that we live in the one which is
tuned just right for life because of
course it couldn't be any other way how
we can't live elsewhere so this this
really comes down to why the planet
might be special I've never okay a
couple of things there I've never really
understood the tuning argument because
it seems to me that if you're a
darwinian you you've already taken care
of that problem it isn't so much that
the universe is tuned it's that we're
adapted to the constants that are in
place now I suppose you could argue that
without those particular constants our
form of life wouldn't be possible but I
don't think that actually shifts the
problem with the argument so because we
have our form of life and we can't
conceptualize or at least not very
accurately what any other form of life
might might what other form life might
take now I know that you know people
have made the case that there's
something particularly special about
carbon in so far as
it's because of its ability to combine
in ways that make very complex molecules
probable and even likely but I still the
the fine-tuning argument always seems to
me to put the cart before the horse it's
like well you adapt to the constants
that present themselves so of course it
appears in retrospect that everything's
been finely tuned and I don't see that
like I'm inclined towards what would you
say deistic belief in some fundamental
way but I don't think the fine-tuning
argument is a very good argument for the
existence of of the specialness let's
say of the of the human psyche so I
don't know maybe I've just got that
wrong yeah I think I think if I can just
respond to that I think there's an
interesting aspect is um the it almost
gets into the philosophical a little bit
is the experience of the Observer
themselves so we are you know a primate
and we have our brains in our in our
head and we have these two wi and we our
our version of experience is really
defined by by the bodies we inhabit and
the planet we live on it may very well
be that there is plenty of quote unquote
intelligent life however you want to
call that out there that is just so
radically different that its experience
is not really comparable to our own so
you could imagine a fungus that lives on
a planet and it totally inhabits it and
it's basically a giant neuron Network
that's on that planet and its version of
experience would be completely atypical
to that of ours and so when we use this
argument of you know well with the weak
anthropic principle we experienced this
sort of version of events and th
everything has to be s b tuned such that
that's the case there may be PowerAll
paths and so when we talk about this
Rare Earth and we talk about weak
anthropic principle it's really a funnel
to this particular type of experience
that we enjoy and it's perfectly
possible there are completely alternates
but then that's not perhaps so
satisfying because if there is a planet
cover and fungus we're not going to have
a communication with that thing so it
doesn't it doesn't really scratch the
itch I think when we talk about the
search for extraterrestrial intelligence
we really do hope maybe naively to
actually engage in a conversation or
communication or an interaction of some
meaningful sense where we can understand
one another's minds and that in my
opinion is probably too aspirational I
don't think that's very likely to occur
well again you look you look at the
Earthly situation because you would
assume
that that's the simplest place to look
for first and we can communicate to some
degree with mammals that are
psychophysiologically similar to us I
suppose the biggest Gap we've managed to
bridge might be with
octopi right because I've seen and I
don't know how accurate these accounts
are but I've seen some documentary
evidence let's say of people
establishing something akin to at least
a relationship of curiosity with octopi
and they're very exploratory and they
have the kind of tentacles that are
sufficiently close to hands that you
could imagine a kind of
parallel mucking about with things
intelligence that that characterizes
octopi because they can manipulate so
well um but that's about it on on Earth
and that includes cians I mean we've
been trying to communicate with whales
and dolphins corpuses and so forth for
60 years really with some degree of
intensity and it isn't obvious that
that's gone very far whales are
sufficiently different from us so even
if we could talk it's not clear what we
would talk about that was what EO
Wilson's arguments about ants I think if
we could talk to ants we'd have nothing
to say to each other because they yeah
well the fund that you know that's
that's a consequence of that
psychophysiological embedding that you
described we we don't really understand
I think when we think of our
Consciousness as like a free floating
entity how grounded in our our hands for
example our Consciousness really is yeah
I agree and even between different
cultures of it can sometimes be
extremely difficult to to have
conversations and and understand one
another's mindset so I totally agree it
it puts me in even with your wife
sometimes that does happen as well so I
think it's perfectly possible that a I
I'm willing to let go of this idea of
the fatherly figure it's almost like a
standin for a God you know the fatherly
figure alien comes down and teaches us
the error of our ways provides all this
advanced technology and Shepherds us to
becoming more sophisticated and mature I
think that's a complete fiction I think
if there isn't other life out there it's
likely vastly more different than we can
possibly imagine but that doesn't make
it scientifically not interesting it's
still extremely perhaps even more
scientifically interesting investigate
because we already know about this
experience so I think learning about
these other possible forms of life could
be extremely rewarding um but I I really
don't have a a bet in the game as to
whether that's even possible as I said
before I do try to remain forcibly
agnostic but I'm actually okay with the
idea of just lots of empty worlds out
there yeah you you you mentioned the
mediocrity principle essentially and
that earlier if I got that right and
that seems to me to be a a reasonable
variant of aam's Razor right there
there's there's no reason to assume a
priority that this corner of the
universe is any different from the rest
of the universe then you would assume
any given handful of sand differs from
all the sand on a given Beach and so but
having said that and I do think that's a
good scientific starting point we are
definitely stuck with the problem that
here we are and we are conscious and we
seem to be rather unique in that regard
and so that that that does challenge
that Assumption of what did you describe
it as I think it was the Assumption of
mediocrity yeah or cernic principle that
that scientists start with yeah yeah so
I think an obvious counter example to
the mediocrity principle and I often say
this when I teach my students about this
idea is a case where it breaks down is
in the solar system thinking about say
oxygen atmospheres so before we had
studied any other planets in in in the
solar system we would live on a planet
with an oxygen atmosphere and say Hey
you know we must assume that everywhere
is typical and we cannot assume we are
special and therefore oxygen atmospheres
must be very very common on all of the
other planets in the solar system and
then lo and behold not a single moon or
planet in the solar system out of you
know over a hundred of those things has
an oxygen rich atmosphere now it's not
all liquid water or you know plate you
can go on there's a list of things and
so it's not maybe surprising that that
is the case because of course we could
not live on Pluto if it lacks an oxygen
atmosphere we have to necessarily live
on the rare instantiation where oxygen
is because that's a prerequisite at
least for for miman life so I'm I'm I
think this mediocrity principle it's
okay to use it in cases where your
existence is not pre predicated upon
that statement so if I was to say um the
solar system has a Neptune as far as we
know Nune has no bearing whatsoever on
the probability of Life developing on
the earth so by the capern principle
many of the solar systems should have
Neptunes and you would be right in fact
Neptunes are the most common type of
planet in the universe and Jupiter's too
are very common so it'd be perfectly
reasonable to apply it in those
instances it'd be very dangerous to
apply it to say our large Moon because
our large Moon may may not we're still
trying to figure this out have some
influences to development of Life on
this planet similarly oxygen certainly
does liquid water certainly does so we
can't take those properties I would say
and generalize them because we're only
here because those things are
here just recently Saudi Arabia ended
its 50-year Petro dollar deal with the
US which has the potential to weaken the
US dollar since 1974 Saudi Arabia has
sold oil solely in US Dollars which was
huge for our global economic dominance
now they want other options if there's
less demand for the US dollar what
happens to its value it's reasons like
this that make it important to diversify
some of your savings into gold and you
can do that with help from Birch gold
right now qualifying purchases by July
31st are eligible to get a one-of a kind
limited addition golden truth bomb the
only way to claim your eligibility
though is by texting Jordan to 9898 98
for over 20 years Birch gold group has
helped tens of thousands of Americans to
protect their savings by converting an
IRA or 401K into an IRA in physical gold
protect your savings by diversifying
away from the US dollar with gold text
Jordan to 9989 and Birch gold will help
you convert an old IRA or 401K into an
IRA in gold for no money out of pocket
right now qualifying purchases by July
31st are eligible to get a one-of-a-kind
limited edition golden truth bomb text
Jordan to
898988 9898
today yeah yeah so I guess the question
there is how many of the prerequisites
for the complex life that has emerged on
Earth are the function of features that
are just as uncommon in some sense as
life and that is a very interesting
exception to that rule of homogeneity
let's say because it it is even from a
statistical from a from a very basic
statistical perspective it is odd given
that principle that the Earth would be
the only planet that has oxygen on it I
know that's also a function of life so
so that that's a very difficult puzzle
to work through intellectually because I
can certainly understand why the
presumption of homogeneity is a useful
presumption it works in many cases and
why it would not work in the case of
Earth is a great mystery hey I've got a
question for you that I've always
wondered about you know I see people
looking for Life on Mars analyzing rocks
from Mars for example or meteorites and
I think this to me thinking biologically
this just seems utterly preposterous to
me because I don't think life is the
sort of thing like on a given planet
where it would be somewhere hidden and
hard to find
I mean if you look at Earth I know I
don't know how far down we've gone into
the Earth's core to continue to check
for microorganisms but I read not so
long ago that there's more biomass in
the Earth's crust than there is on the
surface I mean life seems to be one of
those things that if it's anywhere it's
everywhere it's everywhere yeah yeah and
so so I mean is the argument that Mars
underwent a cataclysm cataclysm at some
point hypothetically that was so
overwhelming that it destroyed all life
but maybe there's some signs of it
sequestered somewhere like what's the
rationale for the search yeah I think
that's exactly one very plausible
scenario uh we certainly do know that
Mars has undergone significant changes
um we see evidence of liquid water once
flowing on the surface in the past there
many geological features that we see
that strongly indicate almost
unambiguously that liquid water must
have been there significant levels it's
just unclear for how long so it may have
been like flash floods that just kind of
appeared briefly or it may have been a
stained body of water this obviously is
not the case any longer and thus we can
surmise from this that something has
happened to Mars over time it's probably
lost its magnetic field over time that
has probably decayed that has led to the
sputtering of the atmosphere it's
probably lost its atmosphere over time
how it's much thinner atmosphere than it
once did and so I think we can imagine
you know this is almost like kind of
looking ahead to the Earth's future um
when we make projections about the
biosphere of our own Planet most of
those projections actually predict that
the biosphere will gradually decline
probably it's already slowly in Decline
at this point the sun is gradually
warming up and producing more Luminosity
that is putting greater greater pressure
if you like on the Earth's biosphere
until we hit this point where it becomes
harder and harder for life to keep up
with the amount of insulation we're
receiving and so most of these
predictions predict that after about a
billion years into the future Earth's
biosphere will essentially collapse and
the only things left would be living in
extreme conditions such as very cold
caves that have been protected from that
intense scorching heat you you might
have some Subterranean life as you
allude to deep in the deep in the mantle
or deep in the crust and so we can
imagine pockets of Life surviving that
are the relics of a once Rich biosphere
and that that's possible it still raises
the problem why we don't see fossils and
we don't see any evidence of fossils on
the surface so whatever was on Mars if
you are an optimist that it had life it
certainly was nothing like the kind of
extent that we had here on the earth um
and having said that it is another
possibility is that life could transfer
between between them so it's also this
is the idea of panspermia perhaps there
is life on the earth which is being
knocked off on asteroids it's Clinging
On maybe a tardigrade it's like clinging
onto a little asteroid or something and
it can actually survive the vacuum of
space these things we don't know if it
could survive an impact like mushroom
spores right yes it could just propagate
across the solar system Mars would be
one of the places that I mean it's
surely the most hospitable place after
the Earth and so you would imagine if
anywhere it's going to be a place where
extremophiles which are highly ad Ed for
extreme conditions here on the earth
they might have a chance of surviving in
some of the you know Remnant pockets of
habitability left on Mars at this point
right okay okay so that's so that's the
rationale so now are you have you also
been interested in the issue of this is
a strange kind of Science Fiction like
issue I've I've
[Music]
seen descriptions in
the pop scientific culture online I
suppose of the notion of different
civilizational
types so is that a is that a notion that
you've toyed with to any degree yeah
this is the probably the kardashev
scaling you're thinking of so this was a
Nikolai kardashev was a Russian Soviet
Union physicist I think in the 60s or
70s and he wanted to try and come up
with a way of classifying different
potential civilizations out there and he
argued that the the most reasonable way
to do this and many people would
disagree with him I think but he argued
the most reasonable way would be energy
energy usage and so he calculated that a
type one civilization as he defined it
would be one that uses all of the IR
radiation that hits the planet so you
know imagine you cover the whole earth
in solar panels and there are 100%
efficient solar panels and the energy
you collect equals the energy you use so
that would be a type one civilization
now in practice you couldn't do it with
solar panels of course you have nowhere
to live so you probably have structures
in space to make this really work but
it's the energy usage which really
matters going to a type two is the
energy of a star and a type three is the
energy of an entire galaxy so there
there is interest I think the reason why
we like this is that if it's purely in
terms of energy we think we have a
pretty good grasp on thermodynamics and
we think it's fairly immutable that any
civilization must operate within the
rules of thermodynamics and so this
places some fairly firm observational
limits on how often this happens if
there really were civilizations out
there that were harvesting all the
energy from their star using it for work
so imagine like your laptop running it
produces still waste heat and if you
actually collected all the waste heat
that it it radiates it'll be equal to
the amount of power that goes in has
been energy balance conservation of
energy one of the laws of thermodynamics
so we can look at these uh across the
sky and see if there are stars which are
essentially invisible in visible light
because that all that radiation is being
absorbed but radiating in the kind of
waste heat band passes which be like
infrared heat signatures and we've been
looking for those actually a few weeks
ago there was a couple of candid seven
candidates that were announced by a
group uh they were scanning the sky
looking for objects which had these
anomalous infrared excesses they're very
interesting however another group soon
after showed that three of these seven
candidates happened to co-align with
known radio sources which they surmised
were most likely background galaxies or
for you know things very far away that
were covered in dust we know that
galaxies do often get covered in dust
and that can produce a similar type of
signature to that they see and so they
argue that three of the seven are
definitely Force positives and in fact
when you run the numbers it's perfectly
possible the other four are too just
it's we haven't seen the galaxies yet
but the the density of these objects
given the number of stars they looked at
looked consistent with them all being
Force positives so we don't we don't
have any compelling evidence for those
objects but it is nice that it's an
observational test we can do uh one of
my colleagues Jason Wright led a survey
at a Penn State where they surveyed
100,000 nearby galaxies to see if the
entire galaxy galxy had been converted
this way and so this is looking for what
we call the kardashev type 3
civilizations and they found that
basically there was no strong candidates
and so this is you know really
intriguing like we we look around and we
don't see nearby galaxies after 100,000
of them do not appear it's very rare
that they appear to have been converted
in this way and similarly for many stars
about 100,000 nearby stars have been
surveyed similar to this so it's very
curious um it means that if
civilizations do develop they probably
don't ever reach this kardashev type two
or type three maybe they go to the
virtual world you know maybe the idea of
just developing uh with physical
structures to add into an item doesn't
make sense and eventually we all you
know go into the metaverse whatever it
is and just decide to live in a virtual
world rather than the physical world yes
well it in some ways that would be a
more straightforward thing to do
obviously because we're already doing
that and it's definitely less resource
intense so
yeah so what what got you interested in
in in your line of research and and you
have about a 100 papers so why do you
outline first your the full range of
your research or at least the bulk of
your research so that we can flesh out
all the domains that we might discuss
and then I'd like to know you know what
what it was that sparked your interest
in what you're in what you're sure pursu
it yeah thank you so I I work on many
different things um my main area of
research is EXO planets so these are
planets orbiting of the Stars we've been
talking about thus far and you know
that's that has always been a
fascinating topic to me just because it
was it was fairly new only in the last
30 years have we've been able to make
this reach have been able to actually
detect these things for the first time
however in doing you know for me when
you look for exoplanets certainly when I
started looking for exoplanets I would
be immediately interested in the
possibility of life and intelligent life
have we've been talking about and many
of my colleagues would kind of giggle
and laugh about that it's still still
carries what we call the giggle Factor
the field of setti search for
extraterrestial intelligence seti setti
and still many my colleagues kind of
dismissed that as kind of a frivolous
activity but for me it's always been
obvious that if we're going to look for
stars which could have planets and then
we're going to look for planets that
could have you know earthlike conditions
then surely the end point of this entire
intellectual exercise is to ask the
question whether they have life on them
I don't understand what we're doing if
we're not going to eventually shoot at
that question so I was never shy of
addressing that and so a lot of my
research has broadened out into
questions of astrobiology technos
signatures which is kind of a modern
rebranding of seti ways of look for
technology in the universe such as the
Dyson spheres that we've spoken about
and increasingly being interestes in
statistics and the application of
Statistics to these types of problems
where as we've already pointed out
you're very data starved we don't have a
catalog of of habitats out there at
least known habitats we don't have a
catalog of civiliz ations discovered
thus far so we are trying to make
inferences about our uniqueness which to
me is one of the most interesting and
fundamental questions we can ask is how
how special or common are we out there
in the universe and we are trying to
make inferences based off very little
data of poity of data and to me that's
always just been intellectually very
stimulating to try and work on that
Fringe of where you know so little but
there's actually still some information
there there is still something there
there's information about the timing of
when Earth developed uh when life
developed on the earth there's
information about the future of our
planet we know that from the evolution
of the sun there's information about the
fact we don't see Galactic Empires and
so my job is to try to S of piece this
puzzle together and not give necessarily
a definitive answer but at least limit
the options down to what is the
landscape of what what's possible okay
so you mentioned that it's been about 30
years that we've had the technological
capacity to even detect exoplanets and
so do you want to talk a little bit
about what that technology consist of
when we started to discover these
planets and then also how in the world
do you in fact discover them yeah it's a
long Enterprise we've been trying to do
ever since 1855 there's actually the
first paper published trying to make the
first claim of an exop it's a lovely
story of Captain William S Jacob he was
at Madras observatory in India and he
was trying to use a technique back then
called astrometry which is essentially
we still tried to do it but it's looking
at wobbling Stars that's what we mean by
astrometry stars and measuring their
position very carefully he was inspired
by the detection of many binary star
systems this way especially by Fredrick
Bessel a German astronomer however this
method never really bore fruit until um
really only the last few years we've
been able to make reliably detections
using this method so the actually the
first method which gave us success was
PSAR timing which was kind of ignored
this happened in the 19 early 1990s
think 1990 was the first ever claim of
this method um it was largely ignored
because PSAR are so strange they are
Stars so these are stars which aren't
quite massive enough to collapse into a
black hole when they die but not too far
off so they're kind of the the
predecessor if you actually spooned a
bit more mass onto them you could
probably tip them over the edge into
becoming a black hole and these things
produce these very powerful magnetic
Jets out of their North and South Pole
and as they spin it's like a lighthouse
spinning and they spin extremely fast
like as fast as a blender basically like
a mil you know once per millisecond they
can spin and we can use these as clocks
like the clock a cosmic clock of the
universe and so if there's a planet
orbiting it it disturbs that clock
gravitationally and we can detect its
presence indirectly so the first planets
were found that way however no Nobel
Prize was given to that you might think
since that was the first ever Discovery
it's Alexander walan at Penn State a
very incredible Discovery it was largely
ignored and still is often overlooked in
the scientific community and it wasn't
until we discovered planets around quote
unquote normal Stars which really means
Stars similar to our sun which are not
neutron stars these are stars in the in
the their main part of their life their
main sequence lifetime as we would say
and the discovery there was through
again a wobbling method but through a
speed wobbling method rather than a
position method so if a planet is
tugging on a star and making it move yes
its position changes but also its speed
relative to us is changing so when it's
coming towards us it'll being blue
shifted when it's coming away from us
red shifted is the classic analogies and
ambulance going past you on the on the
sidewalk it siren will kind appear
higher pitch as it's driving towards you
and sound lower pit pitch as it's moving
away and we can use that same change in
Pitch to discover exoplanet so in 1995
Michel mayor and Didia kellos made the
first discovery of 51 pegy be the first
real Bonafide exop around a normal star
and that was actually where the Nobel
Prize was awarded to I think two or
three years ago um but still I think
reasonably uh many colleagues in the
PSAR world have been saying hold on like
what about us like we were five years
before you and we you know why are we
ignoring these planets
why does the existence of a planet why
does that alter the shift of the light I
don't I I'm missing something yes it's
it's a gravitational effect so the
planet to really we often think of the
planet orbiting a star and the star just
kind of sits there inertly static but
that's not true really it's not that
it's not the Earth orbits the Sun the
Earth and the Sun orbit one another and
so the sun is therefore moving in
inertial space sometimes a little bit
towards us in response to the Earth's
gravitational field so it's this it's
this influence that we can look for
right they both rotate around their
Center of mass don't they the center of
the mass of the system is that how that
works but the center of the mass of the
Sun and Earth is so it's so weighted
towards the Sun that I the center of the
mass is still inside the Sun if I
remember correctly yeah oh far far
inside the Sun even for Jupiter it's far
inside the Sun and in fact the the speed
difference as caused by the Earth is it
is the Sun moving by about 8 CM every
second that's the speed so that's
literally less than I think a the speed
that a snail will crawl and that that is
the speed that we are able to detect at
this level we are getting to the point
where we can now detect centimeters
level per second speed changes in Stars
so it's a remarkable feat that's for
sure that's for sure so you can detect
movement of stars distant stars that are
literally moving at a snail's pace in in
because of the effects of their planets
that is really something well I guess
light is a very accurate measurement
tool so yeah but I have to say even when
these plants were discovered in '95 the
Nobel Prize was only awarded recently
for probably a decade or so people
didn't even believe those planets and
there was still a lot of skepticism
about them and it was only when we
started to discover what we called
transits that largely everyone got on
board and said okay these planets are
are real there was a lot of concern that
these these changes in light that we
were seeing might not be due to a planet
but instead could be due to something
happening on the surface of the star so
maybe there's a weird Sun spot or Star
spot maybe there's a strange flaring
activity or pulsation that is mimicking
this signature since it is an indirect
method it was always possible that was
the case so they were still Skeptics and
it wasn't until we started seeing plants
eclipse in front of their star we call
those transits and they happened
coincidentally with when the wobbling
method predicted they should happen that
everyone kind of said okay this is
wrapped up like there there can be no
question now that these are real planets
and when did that happen that was around
2000 so Dave shano and um uh Henry
independently discovered two uh there
was the same system actually but
independently measured two transits of
the same planet and that was around 2000
and ever since then the whole field has
been largely focused on this we now have
over 5,000 exop plants discovered
primarily using that method so it's been
far the most successful technique okay
now you mentioned earlier that the um
most common form of exop planet is
neptun like
so would you describe for us what a
Neptune like planet is precisely and
then also What proportion of the
discovered planets have been Neptune
like and why that's the most common
Planet yeah well let me even correct
myself a little bit and say it's
actually even like a mini Neptune is the
most common type of Planet so it appears
that you know the Earth is uh well let's
just say the Earth is the size of the
Earth and a Neptune is four times that
size and in between that around 2 to
three Earth radi we find many many many
exoplanets so we call these mini
Neptunes but honestly that might be a
misn we're not really sure what they are
maybe many of them are just Mega Earths
or super Earths rather than mini
Neptunes so a big question in the field
is actually trying to figure out what
these things are they may even be a
completely different type of object like
an ocean world we call those hean worlds
and that's been hypothesized as well so
there could be Big Balls of water in
space so we're still trying to figure
out where these are um we do know that
they're extremely common and it kind of
raises the question actually because
they are so common and why doesn't the
solar system have one that is kind of an
oddity in fact there are many qualities
of the solar system which betray the
trends that we see in exoplanets so uh
for example a Jupiter seems you know
fairly and you might expect to be a
common outcome because we have basically
two Jupiters in the solar system with
Saturn and nept and and Jupiter being
the same size as each other but when you
look out at exoplanets they're quite
rare only 10% of stars have Jupiter
light planets around them so this
immediately is interesting when we look
at the the solar system in different
ways and different dimensions it does
appear that has lots of unusual
properties um we also see many exop
plants which are highly eccentric they
almost like comets going around their
star and they're on these greatly
elliptical orbits we see many hot
Jupiters these are Jupiter sized plants
which are very very close to the star
and we also see also see lots of compact
multis as we call them a compact multi
is essentially six or seven small rocky
planets or sub Neptunes which are very
very close to the star in nice compact
circular orbits but all kind of squeezed
in within say the orbit of mercury
around the Sun so we see many of these
types of systems as well so you can have
almost like a Honey I Shrunk the Kids
version of the solar system and that
appears to be a common outcome so we're
still really making a headwind of like
what do we do with all these systems how
do we understand the uniqueness of the
solar system and clearly there's lots of
strange things going on with what we see
out
there sleep is a found for our mental
and physical health in other words
you've got to have a consistent
nighttime routine to function at your
best but if you're struggling with sleep
then you've got to check out Beam Beam
isn't your run-ofthe-mill sleep aid it's
a concoction carefully crafted to help
you rest without the grogginess that
often accompanies other sleep remedies a
bunch of us here at the daily wire count
on beam's dream powder to knock us out
and sleep better through the night so we
can show up ready for work the next day
just mix beam dream into hot water or
milk stir or froth and then enjoy before
bedtime then wake up feeling refreshed
without the next day grogginess cause by
other Sleep Products dream contains a
powerful allnatural blend of RI
magnesium eleanine appenine and
melatonin to help you fall asleep stay
asleep and wake up refreshed and with it
now being available in delicious flavors
like cinnamon cocoa chocolate peanut
butter and mint chip better sleep has
never tasted better and today listeners
of this show can get a special discount
on beam's dream powder get up to 40% off
for a limited time when you go to shop
beam.com Peterson and use code Peterson
at checkout that's shop
for up to 40%
off so so one of the findings appears to
be that solar systems of the type that
we inhabit
aren't particularly what the solar
system is not particularly emblematic of
the typical solar system that has been
discovered so that's another bit of
evidence for some kind of odd
exceptionalism yeah we we're not the
template I mean even just the sun is not
the template only 10% of stars look like
the Sun and of those very few are as
quiet as our sun our Sun's actually
remarkably stable doesn't flare too
often doesn't have many sun spots most
other Suns we look at are far more
active than our sun so that's
interesting as said we have a Jupiter we
have two Jupiters that appears to be
unusual we have this Rich dynamical
system of eight planets as far as we can
tell I think the record holder is of
seven planets around one system that
we've ever discovered so there are many
aspects about the solar system which
could be quite special um but I wouldn't
go as far as to say it's completely
unique because of course our
instrumentation is finite we cannot
detect exact clones of say Mars Mars is
just too small it would be invisible to
our current Technologies so as we're
getting better and better we are able to
get more insight into the true
uniqueness of the solar system but it's
certainly not a typical outcome I think
we could say that with some confidence
at this point okay okay now you
mentioned a couple of things I wanted to
return to the idea to begin with with
that there was
something suspicious or even frivolous
let's say about the search for life on
exoplanets and I was wondering what your
opinion on the matter this matter is you
you talked about the
projection that science fiction oriented
people let's say might have of something
approximating a religious belief in a
sky alien who descends to the Earth to
save us that was an unbelievably common
trope in the 1970s I mean I read a lot
of Science Fiction in the 1970s and that
was extraordinarily in fact
the the uh grock that musk's AI is named
after is a remnant of that kind of
thinking right because grock was the
mode of apprehension used by I think
Valentine Smith in Stranger in a Strange
Land Robert Heinen's book and it was
basically a sky savior who was humanoid
that came from know Mars to oh yes
that's very see see well that's why I
wanted to bring this up
because there is a religious impulse
that's lurking behind the technological
Enterprise that's associated let's say
with the fantasizing about life and
other planets I mean you see this pop up
everywhere so for example the the uh the
Superman the DC Comics character
Superman is another good example of that
and you right because Superman has Sky
parents and he's essentially a
technological God who ends up who ends
up on Earth and you see the same thing
replicated with well the Marvel Universe
in many ways with Thor and Loki I know
they're drawing from nor nor Norse
mythology obviously there but the idea
still lurks there and I'm wondering if
it's that
subversion like a juven it's a juvenile
subversion of the religious Instinct
that drives these fantasies of
extraplanetary Salvation at the hands of
aliens or perhaps Destruction for that
matter so I'm wondering if you if you
have any thoughts about whether that
might be part of the reason why such
concern was regarded for such a long
time as as less than serious or even
frivolous yeah there there's a rich
history of theology inter mixing with a
search for alien life if you even go
back to the first speculations about
alien life this I think you talking
about Cassini he believed there was life
on the Moon um and so they were
imagining kind of angels flying around
in there these depictions of you know
with with wings flying around in these
caves so they kind of Imagine these
Angelic beings living on the moon that's
why we should one day try and visit
there similar when you look about
speculations about life on Mars persful
LOL was an astronomer um kind of really
an amateur astronomy kind of was an
industrialist first in the 19th century
and then sort of committed to getting
into astronomy and purchase the L the
the L observatory in Arizona as a huge
donation from his from his wealth but he
was uh passionate about the idea of
looking for life and Mars and and he
really believed as many did at the time
that they would be fairly humanlike and
so many of the depictions were uh even
not not just human-like but even
expecting them to speak English and and
interact with radio technology and
things like this it would be English
yeah so it's very much like that Star
Trek Trope of everyone just happens to
look just like us and there was really
no um almost imagination it's kind of
strange to get your head around why why
did they it's puzzling to me why did why
was there assumption that all these
beings would look just like
well I think I I think I think it is an
intermingling of the theological with
the with the material let's say I mean
obviously there is an overlap between
the idea of Heaven and the idea of space
and Heaven has been imagined as
populated by beings forever and that's a
mystery that's a very deep mystery and
and of
itself it's seems relatively obvious to
me that the heaven of the mythological
imagination is not the same Heaven as
the material Heaven that's above us and
I suppose part of the evidence for that
would be that the material Heaven that's
above us doesn't seem to be populated by
Devils let's say Angels or Gods but
there is there is that strange strain of
human metaphysical speculation that does
posit a parallel universe of A Sort or
multiple par parallel universes where
alien being beings exist and you know
there's some very strange things about
that too and one of the strangest things
I know of is the fact that if you give
human subjects DMT which is the
fundamental psychoactive chemical
component of iasa people reliably report
being shot out of their bodies and
encountering alien beings and that's so
common that the main person who did this
research who was a very down toe
psychophysiologist I think got so
discombobulated by the consistency of
these reports and the insistence by the
people who had the experience that that
was real that he ceased investigating
the DMT phenomena so I don't know what
to make of all that obviously and I
don't think anyone else does too but it
is interesting to see the overlap
between the imagination that projects
deities into a mythological Heaven and
the actual domain of Heaven above us
yeah I mean yeah I think I think there's
a lot we can learn from theologians
interacting with them I've been to seti
conferences and theologians are actually
now starting to participate in those
meetings and there's a lot to learn
about it's almost like a search not only
for life out there but a search for for
who we are what we look for says a lot
about who we are rather I mean if we're
looking for uh species which are
engaging in nuclear war because that
that produce such a loud signature that
is almost more of a reflection of our
own inner fears than it is of a serious
uh discussion of of what an advanced
civilization would do and so I think
this connection's always been there well
you saw this in the in the latest
mythological Extravaganza sort of
planet-wide mythological Extravaganza
which was the explosion of the Marvel
Universe mean the the chitori who come
from space are they're basically
apocalyptic End of Time demons right so
but it is conflated with actual with
actual space in a very interesting
Manner and so and it does say something
very deep about our fears about well the
ends of end of the world end of
Salvation and of the notion that both
the end of the world and salvation will
come from what would you say come from
above Come From Below come from outside
something like that yeah I I do this
this doist mentality certainly has been
with us for a long time in setti
obviously when seti seriously got going
in the 60s and 70s the spect of the Cold
War was looming over and it was it was
it really baked into the the origins of
seti was thinking about the fear of
Destruction and Annihilation and I think
there's a certain sense that these days
as well that has been re raising its
head for various reasons and I've often
said you know even if you're a pessimist
about intelligent life in the universe
um now right there might be nobody out
in the Galaxy right now you'd have to be
a much more of a pessimist to believe
that it never ever happens in the
billions even trillions of years future
that our galaxy still has ahead of it
and so if we are serious about making it
our goal to have contact with another
intelligent civilization we should
perhaps concede that it might not be a
two-way conversation but we could have a
one-way conversation into the future
that we could leave a I we could leave a
monument as our ancestors did with the
pyramids and many of Monument Stonehenge
they left us messages from the past that
that transcend their own existence and
if we are feeling maybe pessimistic that
we will never expand this Galactic
Empire there is still hope of being
remembered if that's all we you know
maybe there's I think that's a
fundamental component of our of our
human desires is to not be forgotten to
have some thread of our strain of
existence not be completely futile and
gets remembered by the Galaxy then I
think we should seriously commit to
building a monument maybe on the moon
the moon's an obvious place to do it
because it just it's unaffected by
weather or geological activity it could
last for billions and billions of years
we could build something or a spacecraft
that goes out with messages that just
has a tomb of information about who we
are what we believed in um our Arts our
sciences and I think that would be
really beautiful Endeavor to try and
unify people beyond what we believe in
or or maybe don't believe in um and also
to have honestly some hope that the
universe will not forget us and maybe
it's a small thread of a chance that
anyone will ever Discover it but it's
better than than just giving up on the
idea of detection altogether I think
that's probably our most likely window
of of of getting
detection I think I read a science
fiction story when I was about
13 of some Advanced human civilization
turning the moon into a gigantic
Coca-Cola ad like a billboard so we
could do that but I don't think that's
exactly what you're what you're thinking
about that so let no not not quite that
that would be that would be a well that
seems to be something EAS apprx for sa
well definitely definitely it wouldn't
cost that much to to to spray paint the
surface let's say so hey I'm kind of
curious you you you referred to
something else too you talked about
Dyson spheres and I I know a little bit
about Dyson and and uh he was he was
quite the character put it mildly a lot
of the great physicists are you know you
you tend to think of great physicists if
you don't know much about them as very
very serious and they're like Ordinary
People except extremely brilliant and
very serious but if you look into the
lives of great physicists they're uh
well to call them odd is barely scraping
the surface and so and odd in the best
way yeah well that's for sure so um and
Dyson was definitely one of those
characters and so do you want to talk
about the Dyson Sphere and let everybody
know what it is yeah in case they want
to build one sure yeah Dyson had many
wonderful ideas um I I've I've built
upon a few of his ideas myself in my own
research but the Dyson spheres idea was
kind of the manifestation of this
kardashev type 2 civilization how would
one Harvest all of the energy from a
star and use it to do something useful
with it and so the Dyson Sphere is
essentially trying to construct some
giant shell around a star um now a lot
of people imagine a solid structure that
it would be a you know a solid sphere a
spheroid put around a star but that's
actually not what Dyson had in mind
because he immediately realized that was
not stable um for instance if you take a
solid spoon and you give it just the
slightest nudge from the outside it
would fall into the star so it's meta
stable immediately unless it's perfectly
balanced one slight particle of dust
would nudge it into the star basically
it also has extreme strains in terms of
the tar strength that would be required
that basically no material could
possibly hold this thing together um so
there's immediate problems to to
something in that naive version of a
Dyson Sphere and so maybe a better way
to think about it is a Dion swarm or you
know a collection of small objects which
almost form like a quasi shell but
they're not physically connected and so
these or they all orbit around the start
and in fact they'd have actually
different orbital periods depending on
where they're located at which
hemosphere and what lat you know
latitude they are in this shell and so
this object would be essentially trying
to collect all the energy from the Star
and use it for for what we don't know um
you know one might imagine extreme
computation I mean an interesting
question is what does what does a super
Advanced civilization even do with all
of this energy uh maybe they just solve
math problems until you know because
there's always there's an infinite
number of math problems to solve and
maybe that's what they're using all the
energy
for it might be easy to just toss all of
your dis PL to the side for the summer
but a life of greatness doesn't happen
by taking the easy route the Hallow app
offers an incredible range of guided
meditations and prayers that are
designed to help you deepen your
spirituality and strengthen your
connection to God with hallow you can
embark on a journey of exploration
diving into different themes and types
of prayer and meditation from gratitude
to forgiveness each session offers a
unique experience sparking your
curiosity and deepening your spiritual
understanding you can choose different
lengths of meditation to fit your
schedule whether you have a few minutes
or an hour with its userfriendly
interface and hundreds of guided
meditations the hall app has quickly
become a go-to resource for people
seeking spiritual growth and healing you
can download the app for free at
hall.com Jordan it allows you to set
prayer reminders and track your progress
Hall is truly transformative and it'll
help you connect with your faith on a
deeper level don't lose your prayer
habits this summer maintain your peace
and deepen your relationship with God
download the Hallow app today at
hall.com Jordan for an exclusive 3-month
trial that's hall.com
Jordan my uh my brother-in-law Jim
Keller is a
very famous and able designer of
computer chips perhaps foremost in the
world on that front and he and I have
had some very interesting conversations
in that regard and one of the things
that he's rather comically pointed out
to me in the last 10 years is that the
Earth's crust happens to be made up of
elements that are very similar to
precisely what you need to build a
computer chip and so he could Envision
in his Wilder fantasies which can be
quite wild that all of the Earth's crust
is is transformed into computer chips
and with all of the computational
technology that that would entail and
you could certainly imagine a
technological situ civilization going
that direction because in some ways
that's clearly the direction that we're
going like there there's there seems to
be no upper bound it's a weird thing too
you know I was thinking about time in
this regard you know we we think that
the time that we inhabit is
finite but time is very fractional and
computers can obviously do many
trillions of calculations in a given
second and if you keep adding computers
then that's more computations per second
and it doesn't seem the upper limit to
that obviously defined by something like
energy and material availability and
that's all not to the fractionation of
of time and so you could imagine the
civilization well you can't because we
have no idea what would happen with we
can't even keep track of our
computational power now can't imagine
what a civilization would be like that
had something approximating unbounded
computational power at its fingertips
yeah I mean there's always a bound there
must be some bound even if that bound is
imaginably High compared to our own
capabilities by just the amount of
physical matter there is in the system
so a Dyson Sphere actually isn't just
the crust of the earth it would actually
be comparable to the entire mass of
Jupiter being deconstructed and even
though even though Jupiter is not mostly
silicon which is what you want for for
building chips you can imagine using
Fusion to combine into the elements that
you need so this is obviously extremely
Advanced we're talking about you know to
have the the capabilities of doing
something like this but yeah the real
limits of computation are essentially
how much mass and energy is there in the
entire galaxy and so you know Neil Bloom
Camp he's the I think the director who
made the um District N Movies he gave a
wonderful Ted Talk That I Found very
influential you can probably find it
online about what he thinks the most
likely form of life is and he talks
about the idea of basically computation
spreading across the universe and the
universe waking up at this in at this
instant so as soon as you have these
these ships which can start moving it
doesn't have to be very fast as we said
earlier like um probably comparable to
even the speed of our current spacecraft
is sufficient to colonize the entire
galaxy in a much smaller fraction in its
own lifetime like 100 or 50 times less
than its current age you could actually
spread out and just imagine like a 3D
printer with an AI on it and it just
lands on a planet and it just starts
going around converting all of the
matter interacts with with more versions
of itself almost like a virus and
essentially it's going around converting
the entire Galaxy all dumb matter
becomes smart matter and it that's his
primary goal um it's it's not very
obvious what it's it's what it would do
with all this computation as I said it's
hard to imag you you know what we do
well what we do with it weirdly enough
so you know you might ask what is
driving the demand
for advanced computational devices now
because most people have enough power in
their laptops so they can pretty the
lapt top in many ways exceeds their
ability to use it already now that's not
true in every regard but then so then
you might say well what's driving the
demand for enhanced computation and the
answer to that at least part of the
answer to that is the desire to ever
more accurately simulate realities such
that games can be played with those
simulations and like that sounds trivial
in a way that you'd use computation to
play games but that's only trivial if
you think games are trivial and they're
not trivial they're they're forms
of look there's a there's a very deep
biological idea in relationship to
thought that the reason that we think is
so that our thoughts can die instead of
us right and
so material evolution is a very slow
process and the price you pay to evolve
materially is that your material form
dies if you are sufficiently in error
but if you virtualize that so that your
thoughts are now avatars of yourself you
can have your foolish avatars expire and
you can continue and so it's a very
useful way of experimenting it's
certainly what children are doing for
example when they're playing games and
we don't know the limits to that and I
don't think it's mere fluke that a
tremendous amount of the market for
high-end computational devices is the
market to drive simulation so that we
can play fictional games and so maybe
Advanced civilizations do in fact take
off into the fictional game Space
because it's in some ways an infinite
domain of potential
experimentation now you know that's Way
Beyond the limits of my capacity to
imagine in some fundamental sense but
that's the trend at the moment among
human users and so it's not an
unreasonable
extrapolation it would resolve the
thermy Paradox I mean it's a natural
answer that everybody just eventually
transcends the physical world and
disappears into the virtual one this
would naturally explain why would
anything you know we speaking of Dyson
earlier Freeman Dyson had another
interesting point about this idea of the
virtual world he was so far ahead of his
time he was thinking about you know
simulation Theory way before and people
were trending about it with Elon Musk
statements and things like this and he
had a really interesting idea he asked
you know how could you live forever
truly live forever and he suggested that
in a simulation you could do this so if
you imagine you go far far into the
future it's thought that the universe
will eventually arrive at this what we
call the heat death where entropy takes
over and essentially the amount you know
all the stars burn out and there's very
very little energy left in the universe
intrinsically until there's eventually
almost nothing and so he imagined that
you could simulate yourselves but you
could adjust the speed of the simulation
so that one day for you one full day
actually takes in the real world maybe a
thousand years to simulate so you're
essentially moving you know almost in
slow motion in your simulation and then
once you know you've used up the energy
that's available then you slow down ever
more and ever more and ever more and as
long as you keep slowing it down you can
actually live forever it's a strange
idea so it's called Dyson's Eternal
intelligence and even though the
universe asymptotically approaches zero
energy you can just equally
asymptotically slow down your simulation
such that you live forever so it's kind
of like Zeno's Paradox of like The Arrow
never quite catching up with a runner
and so it's kind of a a beautiful uh
genius idea that he had that there is
potential of living forever didn't Dyson
also suggest that at some level
information was conserved I mean I know
he went way the hell out into the
metaphysical Realms in in his writings
and I read a fair bit of Dyson I don't
know a long time ago so I could barely
remember it but he had some concept that
was essentially theological where what
all the information that constituted the
universe was somehow conserved that was
part of wasn't that part of Singularity
Theory I'm reaching way the hell back in
my memory I don't know about Dyson's
writing to this but it's certainly the
idea of information conservation is
actually thought to be almost an axiom
of quantum mechanics so it really is
thought that Quantum this was definitely
Dyson yeah this this kind of gets into
the idea of like the what we call the
black hole information Paradox when
information Falls in it's seemingly
destroyed and this violates this this
curious feature that we think quantum
mechanics demands that everything should
be really not So Much Information
conserved but reversible if I you know
burn a book and all the particles of Ash
Fall around onto the ground and into the
air in principle I should be able to
recollect up all those particles put
them back together and reconstruct the
pages and the words on those pages and
black hole seemingly violate that so
that has been a puzzle and so let okay
okay so let me ask you about that
because so let's take that particular
example where you burn the okay now now
imagine that you burn the
book thoroughly enough so the ashes have
been reduced to something approximately
molecular size or maybe even atomic size
now you want to reverse that doesn't the
fact that there's Quantum uncertainty at
the level of the atom imply that true
reversibility is impossible because the
information is blurred at the at the
quantum level it's it's certainly in
practice
completely you know impossible to do
this there's no way that in in the real
world you could ever manifest this I
think the the the fundamental best way
to think about it we with these
analogies is maybe not quite right is
the idea of reversibility so when you
look at the equations of quantum
mechanics like the shringer equation or
something or um the wave function
equations they they really don't have a
a a care about which direction time goes
in so you should be able to point in
either direction and end up so if I know
an initial State I should be able to
propagate it forward to a final State
and yes there's uncertainty so the wave
function can expand in the probability
space can change but I should be always
be able to you know do that in both
directions and so the fundamental
problem of of the wave function with a
black hole is that it seems to basically
reach an end point where it's just
terminated and it cuts off this
reversibility aspect so this has been a
big problem and people have been
wondering about it and I think most
people uh work on this believe that
somehow the information must get out of
the black hole we're still trying to put
the one possible candidate is probably
through Hawking radiation so this
radiation which happens that Steven
Hawking predicted on the outskirts of
these black holes it's a very pitiful
amount of radiation but perhaps that is
carrying away some information about
what fell into the black hole and thus
if you did fall into a black hole in
principle you could be reconstructed
from this Hawking radiation so uh that's
that's the the current hope because
otherwise we have to seriously rethink
quantum mechanics how how does the so
that now that Hawking radiation if I
remember correctly it emerges is at the
Event Horizon right right at the Event
Horizon and so some particle an
anti-particle Falls in and a particle
flies off it's something like that
emerging out of those are virtual
particles how in the world are they
supposed to propagate information that's
a good question I mean the problem with
this is that in order to propagate
information about what's inside the
black hole that requires essentially an
entanglement what we call a quantum
entanglement with with States inside so
somehow uh this particle which has just
been created on the Event Horizon it
probably had a let's say an antiparticle
pair which was created just inside the
Event Horizon now because they're
created as a pair they should be
entangled with each other an
entanglement unlike people is is
strictly monogamous there's there's no
way you can have an entanglement that
can suddenly become re-entanglement
we're really struggling with this
problem right now right I see I see so
does that imply that the antimatter
particle that falls into the black hole
is affected by what's in there in such a
way that the entangled particle that's
escaped contains that information that's
the idea if I got that about right I
think people are wrestling with with
tweaking the rules of entanglement to
try and somehow allow for an
entanglement to to be maintained with
whatever fell inside the black hole and
that perhaps the the stuff that falls in
can in a way be thought of as the
antiparticle of the Hawking radiation
which came out and that we are and there
maybe two aspects of the same thing
rather than discret processes so this I
have to say this is not my field of
expertise but I find it a totally
fascinating topic and I've made videos
about in the past but it is really I so
so that so that means that not only does
the black hole evaporate because of the
Hawking radiation in principle but the
information from the black hole escapes
as well that's okay that's wild I didn't
know that that's very interesting so so
what's what's on the horizon for your
field do you think um one of the things
I wanted to ask you for example is that
I know there's I know this isn't your a
of specialty but any light you could
shed on it would be uh um appreciated
I've heard that the the new telescopes
which can see farther into space than
anything we've managed before and
farther back into time therefore have
put some wobbles in the what was almost
Universal acceptance of the theory of
the big bang and so can you clue us in a
little bit about at least what's going
on in astrophysics with regards to that
sure debate so we have this telescope
that was launched two years ago the
James web Space Telescope is the most
powerful instrument we have right now
for peering back into the far reaches of
the universe and thus therefore into the
past because of course something that's
very far away from us it takes a long
time for that light to travel and so
essentially the light we are seeing from
some of these objects is over 13 billion
years old andless we are seeing the
universe in its first few hundred
million years when we looking at the
universe at this very ancient primordial
phase we are surprised to see Rich
structures like fairly mature looking
galaxies they're still nothing as mature
as what we have like the Milky Way but
surprisingly mature given the Epic we
are looking at in our data and similarly
for large black holes as well we seeing
black holes more massive than we would
expect in the center of some of those uh
Galaxy so the puzzle has been how how do
you build this stuff fast enough
obviously um you could argue that maybe
you need to totally rip up the textbook
and say you know all of our cosmological
models are wrong and including the big
bang and we need to change everything I
don't think most astronomers are quite
ready to rip up the textbook I think
there are other ways to explain what we
are seeing without going quite so
drastically um what speaking with my
colleagues about this we a wonderful
colloquium and I was speaking to the uh
some my colleagues about making sense to
this and there was uh one of the
interesting things I took away from that
was the models of star formation that we
apply are calibrated to the local
universe and they may not be actually
applicable to this earliest Epoch so
when we see these uh galaxies these
ancient galaxies we are basically saying
there are too many stars it built stars
and and and too much stuff faster than
it should have done based off the rates
at which we think Stars can form but
really the rates at which we think Stars
con form is calibrated to what we see
around us now which is which is not
necessarily representative of the
conditions well certainly cannot be
represented the conditions of the early
universe and in fact when they've gone
back and revised those models and
they've updated them to account for the
much stronger star formation and more
intense densities that they naturally
have in these early epics it actually
does predict these galaxies in a large
most of the galaxies we see so um in
fact we could have predicted many of
these galaxies had we just been maybe a
little bit more thoughtful about what we
put into the physics of those models in
the first place but it did make of
course a spectacular headline to claim
that the Big Bang model was wrong I
don't want to totally dismiss it but
there there's still challenges but I
don't think it's quite as dramatic as
has been portray I see I see so part of
the problem there too was the extension
of that Prin principle of homogeneity or
uniformity in the temporal domain when
it wasn't appropriate as you said if the
conditions while the conditions are
obviously different soon after the big
bang clearly and the so then the
question would be well how consequential
are those differences and your argument
is the magnitude of those differences
was conservatively underestimated and
that's cast some of the theory into
disrepute but that doesn't mean that at
least in Europe estimation that the baby
has to be thrown out with the bath yeah
I think if you throw out all of you know
the Big Bang model which really when we
say the big model we don't really just
mean the big bang what we call is Lambda
CDM which means Lambda is dark energy
CDM stands for cold dark matter and this
you can think of Lambda CDM as
essentially the standard model of
astronomy in the same way there a
standard model of particle physics that
includes the basic fundamental particles
we have a standard model of astronomy
and cosmology and so this model has been
extraordinarily successful as indeed has
the standard model in in particle
physics it explains such a wide span of
observations that were you to throw it
out it would it would be extremely
difficult to understand how it could
coincidentally explain such a vast array
of diverse phenomena so exquisitly so I
think we we're not you know astronomers
do like it physicists like it when we
get to rip things up but given the
extraordinary success of the model and
this you know one interesting puzzle I
don't think we're quite ready to throw
in the towel at the first punch you know
we're we're willing to fight back a
little bit I think it was arth I think
it was Arthur C Clark possibly I might
be wrong about this who no it was Carl
Sean who said that extraordinar claim
claim extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence and so the well
the proper response to that is that you
always modify your theory no more
dramatically than is minimally necessary
right that's that's the of it's just
otherwise that's true even
psychologically you know um if you don't
every time you're upset with your wife
you don't think that now divorce is in
the offing right that's just not the
solution to the problem so okay so maybe
we could close with this if you don't
mind um uh it's and and this is a very
complex question for a closing question
but so be it I don't understand at all
the the theories that that purport to
include dark matter and dark energy and
they've always seemed to me and this I'm
sure is a reflection of my ignorance uh
uh as post Hawk rationalizations for the
failure of a
theory like sort of like the
cosmological constant but but like I
said I'm I'm nowhere near informed
enough to make that judgment but can you
explain you talked a little bit about
the standard Cosmic cosmological Theory
can you explain how the Notions of dark
matter and dark energy have been
incorporated into that and why
and you have like five minutes just
kidding take your time yeah it's a huge
topic and it's it's something I totally
understand there's a lot of um
skepticism about the reality of dark
matter and dark energy because it is
so uh porous it's so it's so you know
immaterial that of course it's hard to
accept it if you can't hold it in your
hand and you can't see it how do we know
this thing is really there it is quite
frankly an invention to explain
some of the observations that we see but
you know physics is not opposed to doing
that and we've done that for a long time
we've invented many extra terms we know
we've invented extra terms we have
Newtonian understanding of gravity and
Einstein looked at the orbit of mercury
and said that doesn't fit in it doesn't
agree with Newtonian physics we need to
add some extra stuff to make this work
and so we you know physics is always
been iterative and we've always added
more complexity to to our model so in
that sense we shouldn't be oppos to it
fundamentally because of what it's doing
um the evidence for dark matter is is is
is quite strong and diverse at this
point um but I don't think we have
completely concluded that it is
absolutely real and there is still many
interesting clues that there could be
alternatives to dark matter such as
actually modifying again what Einstein
did another level and and changing
things this modified theories of of
gravity so that's possible uh the
evidence for dark matter the classic
piece of evidence that we first
collected was Vera Ruben she was an
astronomer in the in the 70s I believe
and she noted that many galaxies appear
to be rotating so fast that by the
centrifugal force they should fly apart
if you add up how much mass they have
with the Stars the stuff you can see
they're spinning so fast there's just no
way they should really be bound they
should be sphering out into space so she
you know she argue there could be some
extra additional matter there that
simply we cannot see and I kind of like
this idea Percy because why should we
why should we arrogantly assume that we
can see everything that's always kind of
bother me like the assumption that
everything we see should we everything
that we can see with our own visible
eyes is is the entire state of the
universe that seems to be a very naive
perspective to have if just because you
can't see it therefore it doesn't exist
well therefore you wouldn't have air
right you wouldn't believe in the
presence of all kind of things if if you
operated into this mentality so this
this neatly explains the galaxies um and
it also you know with many of evidences
now for another example is weak lensing
so when we look at very distant bright
sources like galaxies like James web is
looking at and we look at their light it
should travel in a straight line of
course but we notice that it doesn't and
these galaxies appear slightly warped
and distorted like looking if you go to
a fun house and you have these curved
mirrors they get distorted into strange
shapes and we see this we call this weak
lensing it's a very mild effect to these
galaxies but it is detectable and so we
know there must be some invisible fluff
between us and these distant galaxies
that is somehow distorting their images
consistently and in fact you can notice
in one patch of the sky all the galaxies
are twisted in the same way and then it
gradually changes to a slightly
different pertubation and so you can
even map out the density of of this dark
matter if you believe it is dark matter
between so this explanation neatly
explains many things another example of
T is tidal streams so when you look at
the outskirts of the Galaxy you see
these uh clusters of stars which should
be be kind of all bound together as one
ball but instead they're kind of being
spaghettified spaghettification like
when you fall into a black hole through
the intense gravity so we can use the
amount of spaghettification we see of
these clusters to measure the strength
of gravity that they are feeling and
that spaghettification factor also
matches the predictions of dark matter
so we've you know there's just three
examples but we have many many examples
now of of I think I think you guys
should have hired a poet to come up with
a better word than spaghettification
yeah I normally call them title streams
but spaghettification always kind of
catches I for some reason it got into
the public Consciousness and so that's
the why I use that term but I agree it's
not perhaps the the easiest term to to
wrap your head around well I suppose
it's I suppose it's no worse really than
the Big Bang as a as a that was a joke I
mean you know poetic representation well
it is a joke but I mean it's it is it is
a joke it is a it is and it's actually
quite funny to call it the Big Bang but
you know it's it's it's definitely
engineer nerd humor funny yeah yeah I
mean we we give these things terrible
names that's
true and and dark energy yeah dark
energy is is much more mysterious we
have far less evidence for this than
than dark matter at least far far less
diversity of evidence for it for for
dark matter we have many many
independent sources of information that
suggest the same kind of thing we would
still like to detect the particle and
maybe we'll one day do this but it
probably not to be honest most of our
detectiv seem to keep falling short and
whatever dark matter is it's probably
just way beyond our energy reaches right
now Dark Energy we only really have one
driving force of En of evidence for it
and that's the expansion of the universe
so when we look at the universe we know
it's expanding of course we can see
things moving away from us that's what
Edwin hubor discovered in the 1930s I
believe um but now uh it's even worse
than that because we see the it was
there was actually a Nobel Prize given
for this because we see that the
universe is not only expanding but it's
accelerating in that expansion so right
that's verying well that's a mystery
this is the right this is the
cosmological constant that Einstein had
in his equations and he put it in there
to try and keep he knew that gravity
should collapse the the universe down so
he added in a term to keep it static and
now we you know he called it his biggest
mistake when he put it in he really
regretted this this fictional term but
now we actually think that not only is
that cosmological constant really
genuinely there but it's even higher
than what he imagined it to be it's not
only keeping in the universe stable it's
actually causing it to to fly apart ever
faster well well the fact that it's
accelerating that really is that really
is incomprehensible you could see why
that would call for the the hypothesis
hypothesis of an entirely new kind of
energy because that's just Preposterous
it's Preposterous
acceleration we have no way to
understand it the one idea is that it
could be due to Quantum fluctuations
vacuum fluctuations so if you look at
empty space you see particles pop in and
out of existence due to Quantum
uncertainty and that happens all the
time but it's kind one of the biggest
embarrassments in physics that when you
calculate the rate of dark energy that
predicts you know the the universe
wouldn't even really be here quite
frankly if that rate was maintained so
somehow this this this Theory must be
wrong at some level this energy must be
being leaked out in other places yet
when we look at dark energy it's clearly
far far less so we don't even have a
real good causal explanation it's it's
really kind of an embarrassment quite
frankly at this point to understand
what's going on so why is there what I
hate to delve into this but I'm going to
anyways because I'd like to
know these these particles and anti
particles that hypothetically pop up in
the vacuum of space why why is that not
energy neutral why does that produce an
excess uh this hypothetical excess of
energy that's calculated by the by the
quantum investigators that you described
because my understanding was that they P
the these particles pop up and then
disappear and that's an energy neutral
that's an energy neutral phenomen it's
it's not because they produce a photon
if if I produce an electron and a
positron so positron is the anti-
electron they pop into existence and
then when they recombine that that
produces a photon so that photon is now
the is is this vacuum energy and that is
now you know there's nothing to
annihilate a photon you can't annihilate
a photon so it's just it's just free to
go through the universe so this is the
where does it come from that pH it's
actually borrowed borrowed energy it's
it's it's what it is yeah so it's it's
it's extremely strange implication of
quantum mechanics and if if it bothers
you it should bother you and Ne was B
famously said that anyone who's not
disturbed by the qu the consequences of
quantum theory has not understood it
because it's so baffling it well it
sounds a lot like it sounds a lot like
let there be life to me you know that's
a
seriously the universe it shines
intrinsically yeah yeah right right
right right isn't that something okay
well that's a good place to end I would
say you know that's that's a nice poetic
ending much more so than spaghett or the
Big Bang let's say so all right so thank
you very much for walking us through
that that was fascinating it's nice to
talk to um a so-called hard scientist
although I think you astrophysicists and
physicists are the strangest of hard
scientists by a large margin so there's
plenty of metaphysics and physics and
that's quite fun and so much appreciated
um for everybody watching and listening
uh thank you very much for your time and
attention I'm going to continue this
discussion with Dr David Kipping on the
daily wire side of things and I think
we'll delve there a little bit more into
the psychological I'd like to find out
how Dr Kipping came to his interest in
astrophysics and how his career
developed and so it's always interesting
to me as a psychologist to find out how
people's
calling the calling that made them who
they are made itself manifest so that's
what we'll talk about on The Daily wi
side so consider joining us there and uh
to the film crew here in Toronto today
thank you very much and to the film crew
there you're in New York City near
Columbia and yeah thank you to them as
well and uh good talking to you sir
thank you for having me Jordan real
pleasure
[Music]